Seabirds enhance coral reef productivity and functioning in the absence of invasive ratsNicholas A. J. Graham1,2*, Shaun K. Wilson3,4, Peter Carr5,6, Andrew S. Hoey2, Simon Jennings7 & M. Aaron MacNeil8
Biotic connectivity between ecosystems can provide major transport of organic matter and nutrients, influencing ecosystem structure and productivity1, yet the implications are poorly understood owing to human disruptions of natural flows2. When abundant, seabirds feeding in the open ocean transport large quantities of nutrients onto islands, enhancing the productivity of island fauna and flora3,4. Whether leaching of these nutrients back into the sea influences the productivity, structure and functioning of adjacent coralreef ecosystems is not known. Here we address this question using a rare natural experiment in the Chagos Archipelago, in which some islands are rat-infested and others are rat-free. We found that seabird densities and nitrogen deposition rates are 760 and 251 times higher, respectively, on islands where humans have not introduced rats. Consequently, rat-free islands had substantially higher nitrogen stable isotope (δ15N) values in soils and shrubs, reflecting pelagic nutrient sources. These higher values of δ15N were also apparent in macroalgae, filter-feeding sponges, turf algae and fish on adjacent coral reefs. Herbivorous damselfish on reefs adjacent to the rat-free islands grew faster, and fish communities had higher biomass across trophic feeding groups, with 48% greater overall biomass. Rates of two critical ecosystem functions, grazing and bioerosion, were 3.2 and 3.8 times higher, respectively, adjacent to rat-free islands. Collectively, these results reveal how rat introductions disrupt nutrient flows among pelagic, island and coralreef ecosystems. Thus, rat eradication on oceanic islands should be a high conservation priority as it is likely to benefit terrestrial ecosystems and enhance coralreef productivity and functioning by restoring seabird-derived nutrient subsidies from large areas of ocean.The flow of organic matter and nutrients among ecosystems is a major determinant of productivity, composition and functioning. Animals, such as moose5, salmon6 and sea turtles7, can connect eco-systems by vectoring organic matter and nutrients between them. However, the magnitude and implications of these natural dynamics are poorly understood in contemporary ecosystems in which humans have disrupted connectivity by creating barriers such as dams, removing biomass and introducing predators2,8. Seabirds are globally important drivers of nutrient cycling9, transferring nutrients from their pelagic feeding grounds to islands on which they roost and breed1,10. This input of nutrient-rich guano increases plant biomass, alters species compo-sitions of island plants, and enhances the abundance of many types of biota3,4. Nutrients can leach from guano to adjacent marine systems, which may bolster plankton densities and influence feeding behaviour of manta rays11,12. However, the effects of seabird-transported nutrients on the productivity, structure, and function of highly diverse coral reefs are currently unknown. Understanding natural nutrient connectivity is particularly important, yet challenging, because invasive predators such as rats and foxes have decimated seabird populations within 90% of the world’s temperate and tropical island groups8.Here we isolate the effects of seabird-derived nutrients on adjacent coral reefs using a rare, large-scale natural experiment in which some islands in a remote coralreef archipelago are rat-infested, whereas oth-ers are rat-free. The northern atolls of the Chagos Archipelago, located in the central Indian Ocean, have been uninhabited by people for over 40 years, are protected from fishing, and host some of the world’s most pristine marine environments13. Black rats (Rattus rattus) are thought to have been introduced to the archipelago in the late 18th and early 19th centuries, but owing to patterns of human habitation and move-ment, are not present on all islands. We use this unique scenario and a mixed-methods approach to investigate nutrient flux between oceanic, island, and coralreef ecosystems.We studied six rat-free and six rat-infested islands, selected to be otherwise similar in terms of size, location and environment. Rats are known to predate upon bird eggs, chicks, and occasionally adults, dec-imating populations where they have been introduced8. Mean seabird density, averaged across a six-year period (Methods ‘Seabird surveys’), on rat-free islands was 760 times greater than on rat-infested islands (Fig.1a; 1,243birdsperha rat-free, 1.6birdsperha rat-infested). Owing to the high seabird densities on some islands, the Chagos Archipelago has ten Important Bird and Biodiversity Areas14. The biomass of 14 bird species within six families varied among islands, with terns and noddies contributing the most biomass, and boobies, shearwaters and frigate birds only common on some islands. Biomass of all species was greatest on rat-free islands (Fig.1b).We used species-specific abundance, body size-scaled defecation rate, nitrogen content of guano15, and mean residence times on the islands to estimate mean nitrogen input by the seabirds (Methods ‘Seabird surveys’). The nitrogen input by seabirds per hectare of island was 251 times greater on rat-free islands than on rat-infested islands (Fig.1c; 190kgha−1yr−1 rat-free, 0.8kgha−1yr−1 rat-infested). The nutrient input onto rat-free islands is comparable to nitrogen inputs by seabirds at the isolated Palmyra atoll in the Pacific Ocean15. We did not calculate nutrient input from rats as they are recycling nutri-ents already present on the islands. By contrast, the majority of the seabirds feed in the open ocean, substantial distances from reefs (Extended Data Table1). By foraging offshore, seabirds feed from food webs supported by net primary production that is estimated to be 2–5 orders of magnitude higher than net primary production on adjacent coral reefs (Methodsand Extended Data Fig.1). Their capacity to access these oceanic prey resources leads to substantial deposition of oceanic nitrogen that would otherwise be unavailable on rat-free islands.We used the abundance of nitrogen and stable isotopes (reported as δ values for the ratio of 15N:14N (δ15N)) to understand the uptake of nutrients on islands and in adjacent coralreef ecosystems (Methods ‘Isotope sampling’and Fig.2). Total nitrogen and δ15N were strongly and positively correlated (r = 0.96), meaning that they show similar patterns in our samples. Soils on rat-free islands were enriched in 15N, with δ15N being 3.8 times higher than on rat-infested islands and com-parable to reported values for seabird guano16 (Fig.2b). Substantially greater δ15N was also evident in new growth leaves of a coastal plant 1Lancaster Environment Centre, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK. 2ARC Centre of Excellence for Coral Reef Studies, James Cook University, Townsville, Queensland, Australia. 3Department of Biodiversity, Conservation and Attractions, Perth, Western Australia, Australia. 4Oceans Institute, University of Western Australia, Crawley, Western Australia, Australia. 5Institute of Zoology, Zoological Society of London, London, UK. 6College of Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK. 7International Council for the Exploration of the Sea, Copenhagen, Denmark. 8Department of Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada. *e-mail: nick.graham@lancaster.ac.uk250 | NATURE | VOL 559 | 12 JULY 2018© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
LETTER RESEARCH(Scaevola taccada) on rat-free islands (Fig.2c), indicating uptake of oceanic-derived nutrients by island vegetation.Nitrogen is expected to leach off islands to nearshore marine envi-ronments through rainfall and coastal advection11. On the reef flat (approximately 1m deep and 100m from the shore) filter-feeding sponges (Spheciospongia sp.; Fig.1d) and macroalgae (Halimeda sp.; Fig.1e) had substantially higher δ15N values near rat-free islands, although differences were smaller than observed for island soils and vegetation. This is consistent with findings of higher δ15N values in corals closer to seabird colonies in New Caledonia17. On the reef crest (approximately 3m deep and 230 ± 55m (mean ± s.d.) from island shorelines) δ15N was substantially higher in turf algae and the muscle of herbivorous damselfish (Plectroglyphidodon lacrymatus) adjacent to rat-free islands (Fig.2f, g). While recognizing the influence of trophic fractionation on δ15N signatures, the relative depletion of the heavy isotope 15N from the soils on rat-free islands across to the reef crests, compared to the relatively stable values for rat-infested islands, provides strong evidence of seabird-vectored nutrient enrichment propagating out onto adjacent coral reefs. The diminishing effect sizes from the islands out to the reef crest probably reflect a range of processes, includ-ing uptake and conversion of nitrogen by micro- and macroorganisms across the reef flat18.Comparison of damselfish growth on reef crests (using growth bands in otoliths; Methods ‘Fish growth’) demonstrated that individuals adja-cent to rat-free islands were growing significantly faster towards their maximum expected size (Kr−K = −0.10 [−0.18, −0.04] (95% highest posterior density intervals), net rat effect), and were larger for a given age than individuals on reefs adjacent to rat-infested islands (Fig.3). This is the first evidence, to our knowledge, for seabird-vectored nutrient subsidies propagating through the food web to accelerate the growth of a marine vertebrate. Given the diversity and high biomass of fishes that feed on benthic algae on coral reefs19, this finding is likely to ab clog(seabird density) (birds per ha)No ratsTropicbirdTernShearwaterNoddyFrigatebirdBooby2,98040314855207340354701RatsNo rats RatsNo rats RatsEagle IslandGrande Ile MapouIle FouquetIle PoulePB Ile AnglaiseSal Ile AnglaiseBiomass (kg ha–1)Grande Ile CoquillageIle LongueIle de la PasseMiddle BrotherNelson’s IslandSouth Brother0100200300400Nitrogen input (kg ha–1 yr–1)Fig. 1 | Seabird densities, biomass and nitrogen input to islands with and without rats in the Chagos Archipelago. a, Seabird density on rat-free (n = 6) and rat-infested (n = 6) islands. b, Heatmaps of seabird biomass per family, on each island. Tropicbird: Phaethon lepturus; tern: Thallasseus bergii, Sterna sumatrana, Sterna dougallii, Onychoprion fuscatus, Onychoprion anaethetus, Gygis alba; shearwater: Puffinus bailloni nicolae, Ardenna pacifica; noddy: Anous tenuirostris, Anous stolidus; frigatebird: Fregata spp.; booby: Sula sula, Sula leucogaster.  PB, Peros Banhos atoll; Sal, Salomon atoll. c, Nitrogen input by seabirds per hectare for rat-free (n = 6) and rat-infested (n = 6) islands. a, c, Notched  box plots, in which the horizontal line is the median, box height  depicts the interquartile range, whiskers represent 95% quantiles,  and diagonal notches illustrate approximate 95% confidence intervals around the median. Estimated net rat effects (median and95% highest posterior density intervals) are: a, 456 [22,6393] birds per ha;  b, 195[184,207]kgha−1 (total biomass) and c, 148[81,211]kgha−1yr−1.abcdefgNo ratsRatsδ15N (‰)No ratsRats No ratsRats No ratsRats No rats Rats No rats Rats0510150002468446687910118108125–5–101015Island Reef crestReef flatFig. 2 | Nitrogen isotope signals from islands to reefs in the presence and absence of invasive rats. a, Schematic of study system. b–g, δ15N values for soil (b) and new growth leaves (S. taccada) on islands (c), filter feeding sponges (Spheciospongia sp.) (d) and macroalgae (Halimeda sp.) on reef flats (e), and turf algae (f) and dorsal muscle tissue of damselfish  (P. lacrymatus) on reef crests (g). For all groups 120 samples were collected, except for g, for which 110 samples were collected (Methods ‘Isotope sampling’). b–g, For box plots, the horizontal line is the median, box height depicts first and third quartiles and whiskers represent the 95th percentile. Net rat effect (median [95% highest posterior density]) and the probability of the effect being less than zero (P(neg)) estimates are: b, −9.9 [−11.3, −8.4], P(neg) > 0.99; c, −11.8 [−13.2, −10.2], P(neg) > 0.99;  d, −1.0 [−2.3, 0.5], P(neg) = 0.92; e, −2.7 [−4.1, −1.23], P(neg) > 0.99;  f, −0.8 [−2.23, 0.6], P(neg) = 0.90; g, −1.1 [−2.5, 0.3], P(neg) = 0.94.12 JULY 2018 | VOL 559 | NATURE | 251© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LETTERRESEARCHindicate higher fish production adjacent to seabird-dominated islands with repercussions for the production of their predators.To assess the influence of seabird colonies on reef-fish biomass production, we surveyed fish communities along the reef crests of the islands (Methods ‘Fish biomass and function’). Total biomass of the reef-fish community was 48% greater adjacent to rat-free islands. Assigning the 123 species of reef fish recorded into feeding groups, we found biomass to be greater for all feeding groups of fish on reefs adjacent to rat-free islands, with herbivore biomass having the largest effect size (93% of posterior distribution above zero; Fig.4a). These results are consistent with seabird-vectored nutrients subsidising the entire ecosystem.Herbivorous fish are functionally important on coral reefs, main-taining a healthy balance between corals and algae, and clearing space for coral settlement20. Parrotfishes are among the most abundant and important herbivorous groups, providing unique grazing and bio-erosion functions. We estimated grazing and bioerosion rates of par-rotfishes for each island using density data, along with species- and body size-specific information on consumption rates21 (Methods ‘Fish biomass and function’). Reef crests adjacent to rat-free islands are fully grazed nine times a year, compared to 2.8 times for rat-infested islands (median values; Fig.4b; grazingrats−grazingno rats = −1.18 [−2.24, −0.11], net rat effect). Although variable, median bioerosion rates were 94tonnesha−1yr−1 adjacent to rat-free islands, 3.8 times higher than the 24.5tonnesha−1yr−1 adjacent to rat-infested islands (Fig.4c;  erosionrats−erosionno rats = −1.06 [−2.77, 0.53], net rat effect). Bioerosion is critical for breaking down dead reef corals between major disturbance events to provide stable substratum for new coral growth and recovery20, and for providing sand to maintain island growth in low lying atolls22. While some bioeroding parrotfishes can take bites from corals, coral cover was not lower on rat-free islands (coral cover rat-free = 26.3% ± 5.2 (mean ± s.e.m.); rat-infested = 28.2 ± 5.5). These data are consistent with seabirds on rat-free islands enhancing key eco-system functions on coral reefs.Following our surveys, coral reefs of the Chagos Archipelago lost approximately 75% coral cover in the 2016 El Niño-driven mass coral- bleaching event23. It is possible that corals surrounding rat-free islands will show greater resilience to this event than corals adjacent to rat-in-fested islands, for two key reasons. First, in contrast to nutrient inputs from anthropogenic sources, nutrient delivery from biological sources, such as fish and seabirds, is rich in phosphorus3,24 and this has been shown to enhance coral thermo-tolerance25 and coral calcification rates24. Second, greater grazing rates, as observed on reefs adjacent to rat-free islands, is a key determinant of reef recovery26.abAge (year)No ratsRats246678910118–0.20–0.15–0.10–0.05010Total length (cm)Fig. 3 | Growth of herbivorous damselfish on coral reefs adjacent to islands with and without rats. a, Age-by-length growth curves for  P. lacrymatus on rat-free (open circles) and rat-infested (closed circles) islands. b, Effect-size posterior density for the difference between the growth parameter, K (Yr-1), on rat-free compared to rat-infested islands. n = 48 and n = 58 biologically independent samples for rat-free and rat-infested islands, respectively.abcTimes grazed (year)4035470–70.200.150.100.0500.0200.0150.0100.005001020304050600255075 100 125 150 175200Corallivore Planktivore Invertivore Mixed diet Piscivore HerbivoreNet log(biomass)gain (kg ha–1)Posterior densityErosion rate (t ha–1 yr–1)No ratsRatsFig. 4 | Biomass and functioning of reef-fish communities adjacent to islands with and without rats. a, Effect-size plots from a hierarchical Bayesian analysis of fish biomass for different feeding groups between rat-free and rat-infested islands. n = 24 biologically independent surveys for rat-free and rat-infested islands. Circles represent means and black and grey bars represent 50% and 95% uncertainty intervals, respectively (highest posterior density). Positive values correspond to greater biomass on rat-free islands. b, Effect-size posterior-density distributions for the proportion of reef grazed by parrotfishes each year on rat-free versus rat-infested islands. c, Effect-size posterior density distributions for the volume of reef carbonate removed by parrotfishes each year on rat-free versus rat-infested islands.252 | NATURE | VOL 559 | 12 JULY 2018© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LETTER RESEARCHHere, we show that seabird nutrient subsidies stimulate coralreef ecosystems, reflecting natural productivity and functioning in the absence of introduced rats. Oceanic coral reefs, such as those in the Chagos Archipelago, are highly productive ecosystems in an oligo-trophic environment, the mechanisms of which have intrigued  scientists for decades27. Seabird-vectored nutrient subsidies are clearly a major pathway through which this productivity is supported, and such subsidies should be considered in the design and analyses of coralreef surveys adjacent to oceanic islands.Rat eradication has been successful on 580 islands worldwide, and although success rates are slightly lower for tropical islands (89%) compared to temperate (96.5%), new techniques and guidelines are expected to close this gap28. As eradication of rats from islands can lead to immigration and positive growth rates of seabird populations29, rat removal should be a conservation priority for coralreef islands. The return of seabirds would benefit not only the island ecosystem, but also adjacent nearshore marine ecosystems. In a time of unprecedented threats to coral reefs from climate change30, enhancing productivity and key ecosystem functions will give reefs the best possible chance to resist and recover from future disturbances.Online contentAny Methods, including any statements of data availability and Nature Research reporting summaries, along with any additional references and Source Data files, are available in the online version of the paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0202-3.Received: 16 January 2018; Accepted: 9 May 2018;  Published online 11 July 2018. 1.  Polis, G. A., Anderson, W. B. & Holt, R. D. Toward an integration of landscape and food web ecology: the dynamics of spatially subsidized food webs. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 28, 289–316 (1997). 2.  Doughty, C. E. et al. Global nutrient transport in a world of giants. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 113, 868–873 (2016). 3.  Croll, D. A., Maron, J. L., Estes, J. A., Danner, E. M. & Byrd, G. V. Introduced predators transform subarctic islands from grassland to tundra. Science 307, 1959–1961 (2005). 4.  Fukami, T. et al. Above- and below-ground impacts of introduced predators in seabird-dominated island ecosystems. Ecol. Lett. 9, 1299–1307 (2006). 5.  Bump, J. K., Tischler, K. B., Schrank, A. J., Peterson, R. O. & Vucetich, J. A. Large herbivores and aquatic-terrestrial links in southern boreal forests. J. Anim. Ecol. 78, 338–345 (2009). 6.  Hocking, M. D. & Reynolds, J. D. Impacts of salmon on riparian plant diversity. Science 331, 1609–1612 (2011). 7.  Bouchard, S. S. & Bjorndal, K. A. Sea turtles as biological transporters of nutrients and energy from marine to terrestrial ecosystems. Ecology 81, 2305–2313 (2000). 8.  Jones, H. P. et al. Severity of the eects of invasive rats on seabirds: a global review. Conserv. Biol. 22, 16–26 (2008). 9.  Otero, X. L., De La Peña-Lastra, S., Pérez-Alberti, A., Ferreira, T. O. & Huerta-Diaz, M. A. Seabird colonies as important global drivers in the nitrogen and phosphorus cycles. Nat. Commun. 9, 246 (2018). 10.  Polis, G. A. & Hurd, S. D. Linking marine and terrestrial food webs: allocthonous input from the ocean supports high secondary productivity on small islands and coastal land communities. Am. Nat. 147, 396–423 (1996). 11.  McCauley, D. J. et al. From wing to wing: the persistence of long ecological interaction chains in less-disturbed ecosystems. Sci. Rep. 2, 409 (2012). 12.  Shatova, O., Wing, S. R., Gault-Ringold, M., Wing, L. & Homann, L. J. Seabird guano enhances phytoplankton production in the Southern Ocean. J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol. 483, 74–87 (2016). 13.  MacNeil, M. A. et al. Recovery potential of the world’s coral reef shes. Nature 520, 341–344 (2015). 14.  Carr, P. in Important Bird Areas in the United Kingdom Overseas Territories (ed. Sanders, S. M.) 37–55 (Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, Sandy, 2006). 15.  Young, H. S., McCauley, D. J., Dunbar, R. B. & Dirzo, R. Plants cause ecosystem nutrient depletion via the interruption of bird-derived spatial subsidies. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 107, 2072–2077 (2010). 16.  Szpak, P., Longstae, F. J., Millaire, J.-F. & White, C. D. Stable isotope biogeochemistry of seabird guano fertilization: results from growth chamber studies with maize (Zea mays). PLoS ONE 7, e33741 (2012). 17.  Lorrain, A. et al. Seabirds supply nitrogen to reef-building corals on remote Pacic islets. Sci. Rep. 7, 3721 (2017). 18.  MaMahon. K. W., Johnson, B. J., Ambrose, W. G. Ocean Ecogeochemistry: a review. Oceanogr. Mar. Biol. Annu. Rev. 51, 327–374 (2013). 19.  Mora,  C.  Ecology of Fishes on Coral Reefs (Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2015). 20.  Bellwood, D. R., Hughes, T. P., Folke, C. & Nyström, M. Confronting the coral reef crisis. Nature 429, 827–833 (2004). 21.  Hoey, A. S. & Bellwood, D. R. Cross-shelf variation in the role of parrotshes on the Great Barrier Reef. Coral Reefs 27, 37–47 (2008). 22.  Perry, C. T., Kench, P. S., O’Leary, M. J., Morgan, K. M. & Januchowski-Hartley, F. Linking reef ecology to island building: parrotsh identied as major producers of island-building sediment in the Maldives. Geology 43, 503–506 (2015). 23.  Sheppard, C. R. C. et al. Coral bleaching and mortality in the Chagos Archipelago. Atoll Res. Bull. 613, 1–26 (2017). 24.  Shantz, A. A. & Burkepile, D. E. Context-dependent eects of nutrient loading on the coral–algal mutualism. Ecology 95, 1995–2005 (2014). 25.  D’Angelo, C. & Wiedenmann, J. Impacts of nutrient enrichment on coral reefs: new perspectives and implications for coastal management and reef survival. Curr. Opin. Environ. Sustain. 7, 82–93 (2014). 26.  Graham, N. A. J., Jennings, S., MacNeil, M. A., Mouillot, D. & Wilson, S. K. Predicting climate-driven regime shifts versus rebound potential in coral reefs. Nature 518, 94–97 (2015). 27.  Gove, J. M. et al. Near-island biological hotspots in barren ocean basins. Nature Commun. 7, 10581 (2016). 28.  Keitt, B. et al. Best practice guidelines for rat eradication on tropical islands. Biol. Conserv. 185, 17–26 (2015). 29.  Brooke, M. de L. et al. Seabird population changes following mammal eradications on islands. Anim. Conserv. 21, 3–12 (2018). 30.  Hughes, T. P. et al. Spatial and temporal patterns of mass bleaching of corals in the Anthropocene. Science 359, 80–83 (2018).Acknowledgements This research was supported by the Australian Research Council’s Centre of Excellence Program (CE140100020), a Royal Society University Research Fellowship awarded to N.A.J.G. (UF140691), and a Tier II NSERC CanadaResearch Chair awarded to M.A.M. We thank the British Indian Ocean Territory section of the British Foreign and Commonwealth Office for permission to conduct the study, and J. Turner for organizing the expedition. Animal ethics for fish collection were approved by James Cook University (approval number A2166). Thanks to J. Lokrantz for graphics help with Figs. 1, 2, and J. Barlow, S. Keith, and R. Evans for comments on the manuscript.Reviewer information Nature thanks Y. Cherel, N. Knowlton and S. Wing for their contribution to the peer review of this work.Author contributions N.A.J.G. conceived the study with S.K.W.; N.A.J.G., S.K.W. and P.C. collected the data; N.A.J.G., M.A.M., S.J. and A.S.H. developed and implemented the analyses; N.A.J.G. led the writing of the manuscript with S.K.W., M.A.M., S.J., A.S.H. and P.C.Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.Additional informationExtended data is available for this paper at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-018-0202-3.Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints.Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to N.A.J.G.Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.12 JULY 2018 | VOL 559 | NATURE | 253© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LETTERRESEARCHMETHODSStudy sites. The Chagos Archipelago (British Indian Ocean Territory) is situated in the central Indian Ocean, due south of the Maldives (5° 50′ S, 72° 00′ E). The archipelago was first discovered in the early 16th century, but was not settled until the 18th century, after which rats were inadvertently introduced to some islands of the territory31. In the early 1970s the British government established a lease of the southernmost atoll (Diego Garcia) to the US Navy for a military base, and resettled the Chagossian people in Mauritius, Seychelles, and the UK. Since that time, the atolls of the northern archipelago have had very few direct human influences32, with exceptionally high reef-fish biomass33, very low levels of water pollution34, and there are currently ten designated (two more proposed) Important Bird and Biodiversity Areas14. However, invasive rats remain on a number of islands, cre-ating a natural experiment to study the influence of rats on relatively undisturbed oceanic islands. In March–April 2015, we conducted research at 12 islands, across three atolls (Extended Data Table2). Six of the islands were chosen as they are rat-free, whereas the other six are rat-infested.Seabird surveys. Breeding-seabird densities on each island were counted annually from 2009–2015 using the apparently occupied nests methodology (AONs)35,36. The entire coastline of each island was surveyed first and AONs were counted directly. Following the coastal survey, the interior of the island was searched. There were no breeding seabirds in the interior of Ile Poule, Grande Ile Mapou, Ile Fouquet, Eagle Island, and both Ile Anglaise islands. On islands for which the interior search revealed breeding seabirds, techniques to estimate AONs varied by family. Brown Booby (S. leucogaster) AONs were directly counted. Red-footed Booby (S. sula) AONs were counted directly except on Nelson’s Island, and Grande Ile Coquillage. On these islands the total surface area of the breeding population was calculated using a handheld Global Positioning System (GPS) and random plots of the area were counted for AONs. Plot size and whereabouts was directed by accessibility, visibility and the vulnerability of the breeding population. The means of the AONs of the plots were multiplied by the number of plots possible in the mapped area to estimate total AONs. Breeding frigatebirds (Fregata sp.) on Nelson’s Island and Grande Ile Coquillage were estimated using the same technique described above for the red-footed booby. No tropicbird (P. lepturus) nesting cavi-ties were located, so tropicbird breeding numbers were estimated by counting aerial displaying pairs above islands or nest-prospecting adults in an appropriate habitat. Shearwaters (Procellariidae) nest in burrows, with the largest colony on South Brother island and some also on Nelson’s Island. Burrows is a loose term that covers rock fissures, crevices, tree roots, coconut boles, and various underground holes. Island surface area with burrows was estimated and AONs estimated by multi-plying from an average burrow density, taken from random 10 m2 sample plots throughout the island. Burrows were assumed occupied when a bird or egg was seen in them, there were indications of use (for example, feathers, droppings), or they were heavily scented with shearwater musk. Burrows were assigned to either one of the shearwater species by identification of large chicks, eggs, or adults. For the species of arboreal-breeding noddy (Anous spp.), direct counts were impractical for the large colonies on South Brother and Nelson’s Island, for which subsampling and multiplication to the total colony area was used. All ground-nesting tern spe-cies (Sternidae) with the exception of sooty tern (O. fuscatus) had AONs directly counted. To calculate the number of sooty tern AONs, the total colony area was mapped and random sample plots were counted for AONs to multiply up to the total area. Plot size was dictated by accessibility, visibility and to avoid disturbing dense aggregations of breeding birds, with numbers counted from outside the colony at random points around the perimeter. Although vegetation type, such as coconut versus native forests, can also affect bird densities15, much of the indige-nous island vegetation has been lost in Chagos14, and we used absolute bird-count estimates per island for this study.Total annual seabird abundance was calculated on the basis of number of AONs multiplied by the mean number of birds occupying those nests per species, and the period of the year that the birds are present on the islands. For most species, a conservative estimate of three birds per nest was used (two adults and one chick), but some, for example sooty terns (O. fuscatus) have one adult, or one adult and one chick present for periods of the year, and others (for example, red-footed booby (S. sula)) have a chick and one to two juvenile/immature birds present in the nest or sub-colony area. The period of year spent on the island varied by species, from year round for species such as the brown booby (S. leucogaster) and common white tern (G. alba), to 4 months for the roseate tern (Sterna dougallii). Biomass of bird species was estimated using the average mass of an individual of each species taken from the Handbook of the Birds of the World37.We estimated the total nitrogen input from guano per hectare per year of each island following previously published methods15:=×× ×NINDrBdResIsAreaijiijijjgwhere nitrogen input per hectare per year (NI) is estimated from the nitrogen con-tent of guano (Ng), the defecation rate in g per species of bird (i) per day (Dr), the number of that species of bird (Bd) on the island (j), the number of days of the year that the species is resident on the island (Res), and the area of the island (IsArea). Nitrogen content of guano was held at 18.1% on the basis of guano samples from similar species in the Pacific15. The contribution of guano was based on the red-footed booby and scaled for other species on the basis of species biomass, assuming allometric relationships with body size15. We adjusted the Bd estimates to account for time off islands during feeding forays. Given uncertainties in foraging durations and whether birds would have full crops and bowels, it is hard to be completely precise in these calculations. We assigned the 14 species into three groups, which account for foraging excursions off island in a fairly conservative way.Group 1: Tropical shearwater, wedge-tailed shearwater, white-tailed tropicbird, sooty tern, brown noddy, and frigatebirds. Foraging will vary during the breeding cycle, but often one adult is foraging and may be off the island overnight. We therefore assumed only one adult of the pair was on the island at any one time.Group 2: Red-footed booby. One bird of the pair makes daylight foraging forays but returns overnight. Adult numbers were therefore halved only during daylight hours (12 h).Group 3: Great crested tern, roseate tern, black-naped tern, common white tern,  bridled tern, brown booby, lesser noddy. In Chagos, these species tend to make much shorter foraging forays (1–4 h depending on species), meaning defecation at sea will be minimal compared to land. We therefore did not make any adjustments to their numbers.Seabird densities per hectare of rat-free versus rat-infested islands were plotted as notched box plots, in which the horizontal line is the median, box height depicts the interquartile range, and diagonal notches in the boxes illustrate the 95% con-fidence interval around the median38. The biomass of families of birds per island were plotted as log-scale heat maps for rat-free and rat-infested islands. Nitrogen input for rat-free versus rat-infested islands was plotted as notched box plots of kg per hectare per year. We also developed a set of simple Bayesian models to estimate the net rat effects on log-scale bird numbers, log-scale total biomass, and nitrogen input between rat-free and rat-infested islands:µσ∼yN(,)iitµββ=+×RATi01β ∼ N(0, 10)0,1σ ∼ U (0, 10)twhere yi was the response variable, RAT was a dummy variable for rat-infested islands, and variances were estimated independently within treatments. The β1 parameters are the rat effect sizes reported in the caption of Fig.1 along with the proportion of β1 posterior density below zero.Primary production and potential prey biomass and production available to seabirds. Biomass, production, and size structure of consumers in the ocean sur-rounding the Chagos Islands were calculated from the primary production avail-able to support them using a size-based model that characterizes some of the main factors affecting the rate and efficiency of energy processing in marine ecosys-tems39. In brief, these factors are (i) temperature, which affects rates of metabolism and hence growth and mortality; (ii) the size of phytoplankton and the predator to prey body mass ratio, which determine the number of steps in a food chain; and (iii) trophic transfer efficiency, a measure of the energy conserved and lost at each step in the chain. In the model, size composition of the phytoplankton community is predicted from primary production and temperature using empirical relation-ships and, in turn, this size composition is used to estimate particle export ratios that influence transfer efficiency in the first steps of the food chain. The model is depth integrated and we made the simplifying assumption that all primary pro-duction occurs in the euphotic zone. We did not explicitly model production of benthic communities, but these would not be accessible to seabirds.In the model, relationships between primary-consumer production and con-sumer production at any higher trophic level are determined by trophic transfer  efficiency. Production at a given body mass or trophic level was converted to bio-mass and numbers at the same body mass or trophic level on the basis of the assumption that body size and temperature determined individual rates of pro-duction39. The modelled size spectrum was discretized into units of 0.1 (log10) for analysis.The environmental data used to force the models consisted of annual mean estimates of depth-integrated primary production (g C m−2 d−1) and sea surface temperature (°C) as derived from monthly predictions for the years 2010– 2012. © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LETTER RESEARCHChlorophyll and primary production were obtained from the Mercator Ocean Project (Global Biogeochemical Analysis Product, BIOMER1V1 monthly 0.5° degree resolution) (http://www.mercator-ocean.fr/; the data are copyright of Mercator Ocean, product and interpretations obtained from Mercator Ocean products, Mercator Ocean cannot be held responsible for the results nor for the use to which they are put, all rights reserved.). Monthly temperature data were obtained from the Mercator Ocean physical NEMO model (PSY3V3R1)40. Inputs to the size-based models were allocated to a 0.5° grid that covered the sea area defined by the maximum foraging distance of the species of seabird, assumed to be a radius, such that foraging areas were circular around the islands (Extended Data Table1). These distances are an approximation from the published literature, given that foraging ranges can vary geographically41. Cells were assigned a mixed layer depth (m) and total depth (m)42,43. Mean biomass and production for organisms in body mass (wet weight) classes 0.1–9 g (smaller prey) and 1–50 g (larger prey) was estimated per unit area by grid cell, to approximate size ranges consumed by the seabird species on the basis of prey-size information in the literature and body-mass class44,45. To address considerable uncertainty in model parameters, we ran 10,000 simulations for each biomass or production estimate in each grid cell, with parameter estimates in each simulation drawn randomly from appropriate distribu-tions. When parameters were correlated, the parameter estimates were drawn from multivariate distributions39. Model results, expressed as medians and percentiles, were calculated from the distribution of output values. Conversions from carbon to wet weight were based on published values39,46. Estimates of nitrogen content in prey-size classes were based on an assumed C:N ratio of 3.4:1, which is a typi-cal value for fish47 and reflects the fall in the C:N ratio with trophic level in food webs that are supported by primary producers with C:N ratios typically averaging 6.6:148,49. Estimates of biomass and production per unit area were converted to estimates of total biomass or production in the foraging area of each bird species (Extended Data Table1and Extended Data Fig.1).While rates of gross primary production can be high on coral reefs, net primary production, although variable in space and time, is typically comparable with net primary production in the more productive areas of the tropical ocean50,51. Given the area of reef surrounding the rat-free islands is approximately 1.02 km2, whereas foraging areas are >105 km2 for 14 of the 15 bird species using these islands, large numbers of seabirds can feed from oceanic food webs with much higher produc-tion than those on the reefs (Extended Data Fig.1). Even the production estimates for prey in the size ranges eaten by the seabirds are typically three or more orders of magnitude higher than the expected primary production on this area of reef (0.0001 Tg C yr−1, if mean on-reef primary production is assumed to be 0.3 g C m−2 d−1)50.  Given the numbers of seabirds and the extent of the prey resource they have the potential to access, the strong signal from guano-derived nitrogen on the reefs surrounding rat-free islands is unsurprising. While the model has a number of assumptions, the results do highlight that oceanic production in the foraging area is expected to be several orders of magnitude higher than production on the reefs surrounding the islands and therefore that the higher levels of connectivity that result from higher seabird abundance have the potential to transport relatively high quantities of nitrogen to the reef systems.Isotope sampling. From each island, ten samples of topsoil (<5 cm from surface) were taken from just behind the coastal vegetation boundary. Loose leaf litter and other vegetation was cleared to expose the soil, and samples were taken a minimum of 10 m apart. Along the beach margin of each island, new-growth leaf samples were taken from ten S. taccada plants. On the reef flat on the lagoonal side of each island (1 m deep and approximately 100 m from shore) ten samples of filter-feeding  sponges (Spheciospongia sp.) and macroalgae (Halimeda sp.) were taken from indi-vidual colonies and thalli, respectively. On the reef crest of each island (∼3 m deep and 230 ± 55m from shore) ten turf-algal samples were taken from dead corals. Ten adult territorial herbivorous damselfish (P. lacrymatus) individuals were col-lected on the reef crest of each island in the same area the turf algae were collected. Fish were euthanized on ice. Fish samples could not be collected from Nelson’s Island. A sample of dorsal white muscle was taken from each fish. All samples were dried in a drying oven at 60 °C for 24 h or until fully dry. Samples were powdered with a pestle and mortar and stored in sealed plastic sample vials.Stable isotope analysis of nitrogen for all samples was carried out at the University of Windsor, Canada. Isotope ratios were calculated from 400 to 600 µg of each sample added to tin capsules and analysed with a continuous-flow isotope-ratio mass spectrometer (Finnigan MAT Deltaplus, Thermo Finnigan). Total nitrogen content (%) was also estimated. Stable isotope values for nitrogen are expressed as delta (δ) values for the ratio of 15N:14N. Turf, sponge, soil and  macroalgae samples were acid washed with hydrochloric acid to dissolve any  calcareous matter or sediments that may have contaminated the samples. Subsets of samples that were run with and without the acid wash had correlation coeffi-cients between 0.9 (turf-algae) and 0.99 (soil), and all samples from rat-free and rat-infested islands were treated the same. The standard reference material was atmospheric nitrogen. Samples were run twice, with select samples run in triplicate to ensure accuracy of readings. Accuracy was within 0.3‰ for soil and within 0.1‰ for other samples, on the basis of soil elemental microanalysis B2153 and USGS 40 internal standards, respectively.δ15N values between rat-free and rat-infested island treatments were analysed using Bayesian hierarchical models, with the area of reef surrounding each island (RA; calculated using GIS) as a covariate, and samples nested within their spe-cific atoll. Distance to shore from the reef crest (DS) was used as an additional covariate for the turf algae and fish muscle samples. Models were run using the PyMC3 package52 in Python (www.python.org), including a t-distribution with four degrees of freedom as:µσδ∼tN(,)oijoij1540µβββ β=+ ++RA DSoijioo01 2j3jβγσ∼γN(, )i00βγ∼ N,(0, 1,000)1,2,30σσ∼γU,(0, 100)0where each organism (o) had their own offset (β1) relative to island-level (i) soil intercepts (β1). Models were examined for convergence and fit by consideration of stability in posterior chains, Gelman–Rubin (Rˆ) statistics, and the fit of the models with the data53.Fish growth. The total length of each damselfish (P. lacrymatus) sampled was carefully measured to the nearest mm. The paired sagittal otoliths (ear bones) were removed from each individual to estimate age54. One otolith from each pair was weighed to the nearest 0.0001 g and affixed to a glass slide using thermoplastic glue with the primordium located just inside the edge of the slide and the sulcul ridge perpendicular to the slide edge. The otolith was ground to the slide edge using a 600-grit diamond lapping disc on a grinding wheel along the longitudinal axis. The otolith was then removed and re-affixed to a clean slide with the flat surface against the slide face and ground to produce a thin transverse section approximately 200 µm thick, encompassing the core material. Finally, the exposed section was cov-ered in thermoplastic glue to improve clarity of microstructures. Sections were examined twice and age in years was estimated by counting annuli (alternating translucent and opaque bands) along a consistent axis on the ventral side of the sulcul ridge, using transmitted light on a stereo microscope.Growth curves for the otoliths from the rat-free versus rat-infested islands were modelled using the three-parameter van Bertalanffy growth function, implemented in PyMC3 as:µσµσ∼=−−∼.∼∼∼×∼∞∞−+∞LNLLLkUkNLN LLU LLUlog( )(,)log( ()e)(0 001, 1)(0, 10)(0,min())(max(),max() 2)(0,1,000)tiiikktttt,00()0100i01Where Lt is the observed total length (cm) at age t (years), L∞ is the estimated asymptotic length, K is the coefficient used to describe the curvature of growth towards L∞ (here split into k0 (no rats) and k1 (rat offset)) and L0 is the theoretical length at age zero55. We specified uniform bounds for the L parameters on the basis of observed minimum (min(L) = 6.2) and maximum (max(L) = 10.4) fish lengths. Again, models were examined for convergence and fit by consideration of stability in posterior chains, Rˆ statistics, and the fit of the models with the data. Fish biomass and function. Underwater visual surveys were conducted along the reef crest of each island on the lagoonal side of each atoll. Four 30-m transects were laid along the reef crest at 3 m depth, separated by at least 10 m. Benthic cover of corals, algae, and other organisms were surveyed using the line intercept method, for which the substratum type under the transect tape was recorded along the entire 30-m length. The structural complexity of the reef was estimated visually on a six-point scale, ranging from no relief to exceptionally complex (>1 m high) relief with numerous caves and overhangs. This structural complexity measure cap-tures landscape complexity, including the complexity provided by live corals, that of the underlying reef matrix and other geological features, and has been shown to correlate well to other measures of complexity, such as measures of reef height and the linear versus contour chain method56. The density and individual sizes of  © 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.
